---
title: On the Grid, part 3
date: 2022-06-27 08:31:06-04:00
excerpt: We conclude our look at CSS Grid by talking about breaking source
 order, positioning items so they overlap, and more.
---

Let's wrap up [this] [series] on CSS Grid by covering a few topics that will
help you make the most of your layouts.

## Out of Order
In traditional flow layout, each element in your HTML source is rendered in
order, from the beginning of your file to the end. When the browser fills a grid
with grid items, it follows this rule also. But as we discussed last time, we
can take control of where items are placed on the grid, so we can actually break
the source order rule for our own effects.

Why would we do this? Mainly, it allows us to structure our source intelligibly
while giving us the power to emphasize more important information through
layout. But it also ties into a web design concept called
<dfn title="progressive enhancement">progressive enhancement</dfn>. This is the
idea that you should design your page so it works for the simplest platform and
build up from there as more advanced features become available.

Consider that some users may be visiting your page with browsers that don't
support CSS Grid. Admittedly, this is very unlikely. At the time of writing,
Grid has global browser support of around 94%. But the same idea holds true for
features that are not as widespread. For such users, you want to make sure that
your information makes sense without relying on the layout tricks of your grid.
But for everyone else, you can use intentional position to provide an improved
experience.

It's critical that your source order make sense, however. Even in browsers that
support Grid, accessibility features use the source order to present your page
to visitors using screen readers and other assistive technologies.

## Overlapping
Since we can intentionally position grid items wherever we want, there's nothing
that says we have to put each one in a different cell. Grid items can overlap,
just likes [positioned items] in flow layout.

If two items are assigned to the same grid track, they will overlap, with the
item appearing later in the source order being rendered above the earlier item.
So, the following code...

```html
<div class="grid-3x3">
<div class="full-grid">This takes up the full grid.</div>
<div class="bottom-middle">This overlaps.</div>
</div>
```
```css
.grid-3x3 {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr;
    grid-template-rows: 1fr 1fr 1fr;
}
.full-grid {
    background-color: pink;
    grid-column: 1 / -1;
    grid-row: 1 / -1;
}
.bottom-middle {
    background-color: lime;
    grid-column: 2 / 3;
    grid-row: 3 / 4;
}
```

...renders like this:

<style>
.grid-3x3 {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr;
    grid-template-rows: 1fr 1fr 1fr;
}
.full-grid {
    background-color: pink;
    grid-column: 1 / -1;
    grid-row: 1 / -1;
}
.bottom-middle {
    background-color: lime;
    grid-column: 2 / 3;
    grid-row: 3 / 4;
}
</style>

<div class="grid-3x3">
<div class="full-grid">This takes up the full grid.</div>
<div class="bottom-middle">This overlaps.</div>
</div>


## Gaps and Gutters
Until now, our grid tracks ran right up against one another, with no space
between. But what if we want to let our grid items breathe a bit? That's where
the `gap` property comes in.

When you define the `gap` property on a grid container, the browser will put
space between each track equal to the value. Imagine that it's making the
invisible lines between each track thicker. (Though it doesn't change the lines
on the very edges of the grid container.) The size of these gaps is taken into
account when figuring out the size of flexible grid tracks (those with `fr`
units).

```css
.grid-gaps {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: 4em 1fr 1fr;
    gap: 1em;
}
.grid-item {
    background-color: pink;
    padding: 1ch;
}
```
```html
<div class="grid-gaps">
<div class="grid-item">Fixed width</div>
<div class="grid-item">Half the remainder</div>
<div class="grid-item">Half the remainder</div>
</div>
```

<style>
.grid-gaps {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: 4em 1fr 1fr;
    gap: 1em;
}
.grid-item {
    background-color: pink;
    padding: 1ch;
}
</style>

<div class="grid-gaps">
<div class="grid-item">Fixed width</div>
<div class="grid-item">Half the remainder</div>
<div class="grid-item">Half the remainder</div>
</div>


## Aligning Items
By default, grid items stretch to take up the full grid track. But it doesn't
have to be this way. You can align grid items along two axes of the grid
container: the <dfn title="block axis">block axis</dfn>, which is the direction
that block items are placed in normal flow layout; and the <dfn title=
"inline axis">inline axis</dfn>, which is the direction text flows within a
block. To differentiate, CSS uses the `align-*` properties to place items along
the block axis and the `justify-*` properties to place them along the inline
axis.

You can either set your alignment properties on the grid container, using
`align-items` and `justify-items`, or on each grid item, using `align-self` and
`justify-self`. Each takes the same list of value keywords, including the
default `stretch`, `start`, `end`, `center`, and more. When you change the
alignment value for a container or an individual item, the grid item no longer
stretches, instead sizing along that axis to whatever its normal value would be
based on its content.

Let's see what a few of these alternate values look like along each axis, using
`align-self` and `justify-self`. Remember that `align-items` and `justify-items`
will make every grid item in the container use the same placement.

<style>
.grid-align, .grid-justify {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr;
    gap: 1ch;
}
.grid-align {
    height: 5em;
}
.grid-justify {
    margin-top: 1em;
}
.grid-align div, .grid-justify div {
    background-color: pink;
    padding-inline: 1ch;
}
.justify-start {
    justify-self: start;
}
.justify-center {
    justify-self: center;
}
.justify-end {
    justify-self: end;
}
.align-start {
    align-self: start;
}
.align-center {
    align-self: center;
}
.align-end {
    align-self: end;
}
</style>

<div class="grid-align">
<div class="align-start">align-*: start;</div>
<div class="align-center">align-*: center;</div>
<div class="align-end">align-*: end;</div>
</div>

<div class="grid-justify">
<div class="justify-start">justify-*: start;</div>
<div class="justify-center">justify-*: center;</div>
<div class="justify-end">justify-*: end;</div>
</div>

## Conclusion
There you have it. I know it's been a lot to take in, but CSS Grid is a really
powerful tool for making effective layouts on the web. I hope you play around
with it, and I'd love to see what you come up with!


<!-- Links & References -->
[this]: /posts/grid/
[series]: /posts/grid-2/
[positioned items]: /posts/positioning/
